Human-AI Interaction, Spring 2026
Final Project
The goal of the final project is to give you a more in-depth look at a topic of your choice within Human-AI interaction. Please choose one of the tracks described below. 
The project can be done individually or in groups of 2 (maximum).


Project Rubric 


Option A
Write an article on a Human-AI topic of your choice. This could be a deeper look at a topic we covered in class, or approach an entirely new topic. This article should be in the style of an article or blog post that a public citizen would read on the web.


Format
Depth & Length To give you a sense of depth and length your article should go into, here are two examples: one from The Atlantic and another from Buzzfeed on the same topic of fake news analysis. Note with web format, spacing, images, and larger font sizes give things more space. Roughly, though, these articles are between 1,600 - 3,000 words, which should be the general range your article falls in.
Submission Format Please submit your article as a PDF to Canvas. You are also free to post your article on any platform, like Medium or your own website. The reason is for giving feedback to you in PDF, and not running into web issues like Medium paywalls during grading.
Citations You must must must provide proper credit for any research, articles, or images you reference in your article. Since this is for educational purposes, you are free to use any images you find on the web… but put a nice little caption below the image to say who the image belongs to. See the Atlantic and Buzzfeed examples for some nice inline examples of citations, which can be as simple as web links inline. If you cite a research article, put a formal citation (any style like APA, Chicago, etc) at the bottom of your article as well as an inline citation like this: [1] or like this: (Linneaus 1758). Normal CMU plagiarism policy applies. Be cool.


Content
The tone and focus of your article can be any argument that you want the range of Human-AI Interaction topics. It can address a more general public or more technical audience. However, although a lot of your article may be a discussion and synthesis of these topics, to give your work more depth, you must cite at least 15 peer-reviewed academic papers on your topic. Many AI topics have a ton of super active research work going on right now, so this shouldn’t be hard to find some good foundational or summary papers on your topic to get you started. (Note that papers on Arxiv that have not been reviewed at a conference or journal don’t count. Ask us if you aren’t sure.) 
Meanwhile, cite however many other kinds of sources, like news articles or whatever, that you feel help build your story.
* You may decide to write a speculative fiction about how Human-AI interaction will look in the future (like what we did for the Black Mirror Writing Room). If you choose this avenue, the same requirements apply. (And yes, the fiction must have an argument.) For instance, you may include an “author’s note” at the end of your fiction that connects ideas you’ve imagined to current events or technologies today, including the citations.
What is this argument thing we keep talking about? An argument is your position on a question that has multiple possible answers. Here are some example arguments: 
1. Cameras in public spaces must, by law, be prohibited from using face recognition technology. 
2. In order to make true advances in human-facing AI applications, it is essential to test with users in emerging economies (e.g. China, India, Ethiopia). Users from developed countries (e.g. the US, Iceland) bring in too many expectations from their prior experience with technology


[1] Linnaeus, C. (1758). "Felis Catus". Systema naturae per regna tria naturae: secundum classes, ordines, genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis (in Latin). 1 (Tenth reformed ed.). Holmiae: Laurentii Salvii. p. 42.


Option B
Create something cool! Build an ML application to address a real-world problem. 


Scope
Keep in mind that the end of the semester gets busy, so although you will have a long time for this project, scope something that can be implemented in 2-ish weeks (you should consider the time spent beyond implementation, e.g., user research, prototypes, and pilot user evaluation). Better to have a polished demo that does one interesting thing with AI really well than try to do a ton of things and end up not getting any of them to work well. Make sure your project is a solid core task that you can achieve (see “minimum goal” above) as well as some ideas you’d like to implement with time but maybe more risky (“reach goals” above). In other words, try to separate out must-haves from would be nice to have as you brainstorm your application.
You may leverage existing open-source code or use existing foundation models, whether commercial (such as GPT or Gemini) or open-source. If you use commercial models, you are responsible for any associated fees. If you use any generative or foundation models, you must provide the full prompts used in the code submission. 
Your system must include an interface that allows users to interact with it directly.


Final submission format
Code You are welcome to make a local app, a browser app, a phone app, or whatever you deem appropriate for the interaction. Regardless of the format, you will need to submit a zip file or a Github repo containing all of your code resources and other resources to make your project run. 
Video Walkthrough The rationale here is: I can’t always get everyone’s code to replicate on my machine without bugs. To give your project the best possible opportunity for grading well in case I run into problems running it, you will also submit a demo video. The demo video can be a cheap screen capture with a voice over where you film basically what your interaction does and how the user interacts with it. Don’t bother with amazing high-end video quality unless this is something for your own benefit that you’d like to capture for your own professional photo. It just needs to be the quality that we can understand what’s going on and hear your commentary during the walkthrough. You can upload this to canvas per your choice as a .mp3 or upload it to Youtube and submit us the link.
In the video walkthrough, you should also describe verbally (1) how the things you learn from the class (e.g., principles of human AI Interaction, how to mitigate the negative impacts of the different types of errors on user experiences, explainability and interpretability, privacy, and fairness etc.) and (2) how piloting with a potential user influence your design choices. Note that you are required to invite a pilot user to test use your system. The pilot user does not necessarily have to be the target users of your application/system. A convenient sample (e.g., your friend, or your family member) is fine. 


Option C
Conduct a research project on a Human-AI topic of your choice. 


Scope 
Carrying out a research project. You should have a clear research question – “what you are planning to study”, and a motivation – “why you want to study it”. You are expected to identify a method to answer your research question - “how you are planning to study it”. You are expected to execute the project and communicate your findings in the presentation and final report. 
If you choose this track, we highly encourage you to come to our office hours and discuss your project plan and scope with the instructors. 


Final submission format
Final report: Submit a research report using the CHI submission format. https://chi2022.acm.org/for-authors/presenting/papers/chi-publication-formats/
 


Project Proposal 
Write up a short paragraph and submit it to Canvas describing the following:
* Which final project proposal option will you do?
* If OPTION A:
   * Give a broad topic or a few possible specific topics that you are interested in writing your article on.
   * What argument around that topic are you most interested in discussing?
* If OPTION B:
   * What are your ideas (even vague) for the kind of applications you will build? Please give a reach goal for the best possible outcome you can envision from this project if things go well. Please give a minimum goal for the minimum you will be able to turn in if things go terribly wrong with your plan. This will help us give you feedback on the scoping of your project.
   * What are your learning goals from doing this project? Preferably, you should be able to say what you’ll learn from doing each part of the project.  
   * What is the platform for your app? E.g. a web/mobile app, or any other format
   * Where will the ‘human’ user fit into your application? How are you going to apply the things you learn from this class to your app?  
* If OPTION C:
   * Give a broad topic or a few possible specific topics that you are interested in conducting research on.
   * What research methods are you considering using?
   * What outcomes/findings do you anticipate the project might generate?